what is mongodb ? 
1. mongodb is an opensource, document-oriented nosql database management system .
database management system - 
MongoDB,MySQL,Oracle,PostgreSQL,Microsoft SQL Server,IBM Db2,
Amazon RDS,Microsoft Access,Cassandra,,FileMaker,SQLite


but what is document-oriented nosql 
now focus on - document-oriented nosql - 
What is a Document Database?
A document database (also known as a document-oriented database or a document store) is a database that stores information in documents. 
means 
it stores its databases as documnets in format of json files.


now why mongodb?
Document databases offer a variety of advantages, including:
    An intuitive data model that is fast and easy for developers to work with.
    A flexible schema that allows for the data model to evolve as application needs change.
    The ability to horizontally scale out.

it is designed for flexibility, scalability , and performance in handling unstructured or semi-structured data. 

more about mongodb : 
creted by 10gen . 

difference between sql and mongodb
sql - 
1.sql databases are relational databases( a type of database that stores and provides access to data in form of table ) , 
they use structured tables to store data . 
2. suitable for applications with well defined schemas(predefination structure of data ) and fixed data structures .
3. e-commerce platforms , hr managements etc.
4,. exmaples : mysql ,postsql , oracle etc.



mongodb(nosql) - 
1.designed for flexibility , scalability , and performance in handling unstructured or semi-structured data 
2. nosql database are non-relational database .
3. they provie flexibility in data storage , allowing varied data types and structures . 
4. ideal for applications with dynamic  or evolving data models .like facebook , instagram , 
5. cms , scial media platforms , gmaing etc .
4. mongodb , casendra etc.

sql and nosql explained in hindi -> 

 watch the mongodb 5 hours video from 18:18  
explained properly with example 





